Draft blog post (#109)
UptakeOpenSource/autofocus: docs/blog_post.md

DRAFT ONLY--DO NOT QUOTE

# ShopRunner Data Science for Good: Automating Urban Wildlife Classification

![coyote](https://github.com/uptake/autofocus/raw/master/gallery/coyote1.jpg) 
<!--TK image caption formatting-->
Software developed by data scientists at ShopRunner and Uptake supports the work of urban wildlife researchers by automatically classifying images taken by motion-activated cameras, such as this image of a coyote in the Chicago area.

> The growth of cities threatens animal species that do not adapt well to urban environments. **The Lincoln Park Zoo's Urban Wildlife Institute studies how urbanization affects wildlife in part by collecting images from motion-activated cameras**, beginning in 2010 around Chicago but now from more than twenty urban areas. For almost a decade, volunteers have been helping in their efforts by identifying the animal species that appear in each of those images in the online [Zooniverse](https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/zooniverse/chicago-wildlife-watch) crowdsourcing platform. However, the rate of image collection now exceeds the rate of image labeling. The information that the images contain is effectively unavailable to researchers until they have been labeled, so **image labeling has become a bottleneck that holds back their research.**

Reviewer: I'd add just a little more info into this first paragraph. Suggestion below.

```suggestion
We live on an urban planet, and as cities continue to grow in size, a basic challenge for conservation is to understand how wildlife respond to urbanization.  **The Lincoln Park Zoo's Urban Wildlife Institute studies how urbanization affects wildlife by placing motion-activated cameras in urban green spaces**. When a species walks in view of the camera, a photo is taken, which can then be used to determine where in a city a species resides. And while their study started in Chicago in 2010, the Urban Wildlife Institute now collaborates with partners in over 20 cities to systematically collect data on urban wildlife distributions using the same motion-activated cameras. Scaling up this research has resulted in a huge increase in the number of photos to classify. Historically, volunteers have been helping in their efforts by identifying the animal species that appear in each of those images in the online [Zooniverse](https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/zooniverse/chicago-wildlife-watch) crowdsourcing platform. However, the rate of image collection now exceeds the rate of image labeling. The information that the images contain is effectively unavailable to researchers until they have been labeled, so **image labeling has become a bottleneck that holds back their research.**
```

Author: Thanks! Given that my main goal is to recruit more data scientists, I'm inclined to keep the current structure as it is for the sake of getting to the data science as quickly as possible. However, I will adopt some of the wording you've suggested and perhaps sprinkle in more context after the opening paragraph.

> Fortunately, it is now possible to create computer programs that label images with accuracy comparable to that of humans. Moreover, ShopRunner's data science team has experience building such programs to classify products across ShopRunner's retail network for its marketplace app District. For over two years, **data scientists from ShopRunner and Uptake have been working with the Urban Wildlife Institute to use automated image classification techniques to unblock the institute's research efforts.** 

Reviewer 2: This classification work isn't just for District, so I'd say "classify products across ShopRunner's retail network, in particular for its marketplace app District" (or something like that).

**The data and code used for this project are [publicly available](https://github.com/uptake/autofocus) so that anyone interested in developing the relevant skills can get involved.**

## Impact

> > It was like they gifted us 10 interns who could work around the clock. Autofocus enables us to get on top of our backlog of images and deliver valuable insights on local wildlife now.

Author: @mfidino please confirm permission to use this quote.

Reviewer: By all means, go ahead and use the quote.

>

> > --Urban Wildlife Institute researcher Mason Fidino, PhD <!--TK image of Mason-->

Author: @mfidino please provide a headshot to use here.

Reviewer: I've got one here that you can use

https://github.com/mfidino/mfidino.github.io/blob/master/images/mason_picture.jpg

Approximately 10-15 percent of the images that the Urban Wildlife Institute's cameras capture contain humans rather than the wildlife that is relevant to the institute's research. Those images are a major nuisance because the institute wishes to respect privacy by filtering out those images before posting the rest online for volunteers to label.

> ![](human_example.JPG)

Author: @mfidino please confirm permission to use this image.

Reviewer: If you are trying to use a human example from a camera trap, I'm comfortable with it so long as it's of someone from UWI. I don't see this example in the post though.

<!--TK image caption formatting-->

> The Urban Wildlife Institute's cameras often capture images of people jogging or walking dogs, or (as in this case) images of the researchers themselves stopping by to service them.

Reviewer: ...stopping by to service a deployed camera (using 'them' creates some confusion as what what we are trying to service.)

To address this problem, Uptake's philanthropic arm Uptake.org developed the first version of a program called Autofocus that can classify an image as containing a human or not. That program proved to be sufficiently accurate to remove approximately 50% of human-containing images with a negligible rate of false positives. **On one batch of images from Spring 2016, the Urban Wildlife Institude was able to use that model to filter out roughly 3,700 images.** "It was like they gifted us 10 interns who could work around the clock," said Urban Wildlife Institute researcher Mason Fidino. "Autofocus enables us to get on top of our backlog of images and deliver valuable insights on local wildlife now."

> **Data scientists at ShopRunner contributed to a second version of Autofocus that not only appears to increase human label accuracy, but also provides labels for eighteen additional kinds of animals.** The accuracy of that second version is currently under review, but preliminary results suggest that it is sufficient to automate classification of a large percentage of incoming images at least for common animal types such as deer and raccoons, further improving the speed of the Urban Wildlife Institute's research.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Data scientists at ShopRunner contributed to a second version of Autofocus that not only appears to increase human label accuracy, but also provides labels for eighteen additional species.** The accuracy of that second version is currently under review, but preliminary results suggest that it is sufficient to automate classification of a large percentage of incoming images at least for common animal types such as deer and raccoons, further improving the speed of the Urban Wildlife Institute's research.
```

Reviewer: eighteen additional species instead of 'kinds of animals'

Author: I'm avoiding "species" here because many of the labels are at higher taxonomic levels (e.g. "deer").

> **Data scientists at ShopRunner contributed to a second version of Autofocus that not only appears to increase human label accuracy, but also provides labels for eighteen additional kinds of animals.** The accuracy of that second version is currently under review, but preliminary results suggest that it is sufficient to automate classification of a large percentage of incoming images at least for common animal types such as deer and raccoons, further improving the speed of the Urban Wildlife Institute's research.

Reviewer 2: Could you currently give _any_ concrete metrics on performance?

Author: There are some in https://github.com/uptake/autofocus/blob/master/autofocus/train_model/train_multilabel_model.ipynb. I'm not sure I have anything offhand that I could report with little explanation without being confusing or potentially misleading. E.g. I have an accuracy score, but it is a bit confusing in that it's aggregated over all categories, and there are some subtleties related to the scope of the dataset and the way the train/test splits were done that are hard to convey briefly. Mason is working to run the model on a more representative set of images and to tune the thresholds per-category, which will then allow us to say things about e.g. how many images they can remove with an acceptably low false-positive rate.

## Methods

![](https://brooksbrothers.scene7.com/is/image/BrooksBrothers/SX00251_HEATHER-GREY?$bbproductimages$)
<!--TK get a fashion image that we definitely have permission to use and adjust caption accordingly-->
<!--TK image caption formatting-->

> ShopRunner data scientists repurposed for Autofocus work that they did to develop a system that can classify this image as showing a gray, melange, knee-length, sleeveless dress for ShopRunner's iOS shopping app District.

Reviewer: This sentence is a little confusing. Perhaps the 'for' before Autofocus is not supposed to be there?

Right now I'm not sure if the wildlife classifier got reporposed from the clothes classifier or vice versa

Reviewer 2: I think it should be something like "For Autofocus, ShopRunner data scientists repurposed work that they did to develop a system that can classify this image as showing a gray, melange, knee-length, sleeveless dress for ShopRunner's iOS shopping app District."

The Autofocus image classification model uses techniques from *deep learning*, an area of artificial intelligence that allows computers to learn how to perform tasks such as labeling images from examples rather than through explicit rules. Deep learning models for image classification have been known to provide greater accuracy than trained humans on public benchmark datasets.

> ShopRunner uses deep learning image classification along with text classification models internally to place products from across its large retailer network into one set of categories so that users of its iOS app District can shop across that network in one convenient interface. Applying the same techniques to Autofocus allows its data scientists to hone their skills further in a way that has the potential to foster healthy ecosystems.

Reviewer 2: As mentioned earlier, these categories are used in other places, for example on our website and in emails. It's good to call out District, but it would also be nice to highlight how crucial this work is to the entire ShopRunner ecosystem.

## How You Can Help

![](https://zooniverseblog.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/elephants-at-sunrise.jpg)

> <!--TK get a camera trap image clearly not from Chicago that we definitely have permission to use-->

Reviewer: I could ask one of our partners for the go ahead. Conversely, you could probably use one of our figures from an open access article.
https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/fee.2030

Figure 2 has a photo of a deployed camera as well as some pictures of different species in different cities. So long as you cite the figure you have permission to use it.
